---
layout: post
title: "Blessed Child Reflection - Miracles of God"
date: 2024-04-06
---

“… when seen through spiritual eyes, a healed heart and transformed life are far more spectacular than a straightened hand or restored sight.” – Bill Bright

A question that I have often pondered is: Why, if a God who did so many miraculous incredible signs and wonders in the Bible, seems to be so quiet now in this regard?

It’s not every day you hear of miraculous healings or people risen from the dead. Yet the power of story has opened the eyes of my heart to see this in a new light, the light of a child.

But first, looking at story, we see one of the most, if not the most incredibly powerful mediums to spread the gospel and message of who Christ is. Everyone can relate to story in some shape or form, whether it was ancient poetry and literature or modern-day movies. As people, we are captivated and immersed into a world that is not our own, yet it often feels as if we are a part of it. In the world of fiction, the lines of reality to the reader can be blurred by their own belief in it. For in many ways, the struggles a person faces, even in a story, though possibly fiction and far-fetched, are the story of someone, somewhere in history, even if not directly. The story of a person facing survival on a spaceship may be the story of someone in history facing the same struggles of survival, even if not in the same exact setting.

We see the greatest example of something like this in our greatest hope, Jesus. He came to this world, our greatest teacher in history, and through his unfathomable wisdom, decided that parables (story) were the most effective way to tell us who He is and how to truly live. The Bible is filled with story itself, even if not as obviously seen. Many might look at genealogies as tedious, but lying below the surface is a deep history of story of people. The design of the tabernacle may seem long-winded to some but tells a story of God's character if we but open our eyes to it.

In reading the book _A Blessed Child_ by Ted Dekker and Bill Bright, I found a few revelations. The first that struck me was that the events of the book may seem completely supernatural and out of this world, but really it just takes on a modern interpretation of a time that happened where miraculous wonders and signs that are no less dramatic, taking the sun standing still as an example, were common to God's chosen people. Yet to us, it can seem inconceivable, whether this is due to a lack of faith that has developed over the last 2000 years or something else, I don’t know. Although this surrounds our Western world, if you look deeper, you see this not to be the case.

Maybe it links to our comfort and abundance of resources in the Western society or not ‘facing’ death on a continual basis. Whatever the reason, just because it may not surround our immediate circumstances doesn’t mean it doesn’t exist. In fact, in many Eastern regions where Christians are constantly under threat and their life rests in God’s hand, we see His powerful hand move and hear many stories of His grace and miraculous works. If you lose your life, you will find it [Matthew 10:39], so clearly relates. Though people may lose so much, they gain something even more, their life filled with Jesus.

But often what we see as ‘miraculous and supernatural’ is so often just the bare surface of it. I think Jesus is the best example of this. We may look at the Jews and think ‘How could they be so blinded?’ Yet we find ourselves in a similar position. A miracle today may look like being completely healed, saved from the jaws of death, or what we consider best to ‘magically’ happen. In the same way, the Jews thought Christ's salvation would look like Him overthrowing the Roman emperor and ruling on earth, but that would mean we missed the greatest victory ever. Their version may have temporarily solved the problem for even a few hundred years, but sin would not have been defeated the way it was through Jesus’ resurrection and would have returned to the hearts of the people. In a similar way, a person may be saved from the jaws of death today, but to what end? To live another few decades on earth before death finds them again. That saving means nothing if there is no real salvation and discovery of Jesus. One could say that the greatest miracles today are that of a sinful, broken, and contrite heart finding and seeing Jesus, and by His grace alone, made clean (receive salvation). This doesn’t mean that there isn’t a place for God to do wonders and signs and heal people. Jesus healed many while walking on earth and continues to do so today, but all to the glory of His name, and ultimately it is used for the salvation of people’s hearts, their spirit, not their body.

“There are only two ways to live your life. One is as though nothing is a miracle. The other is as though everything is a miracle.” – Albert Einstein

What I have seen here I have seen with my eyes and heard with my ears many times, but for the first time I truly experienced it where the eyes of my heart have been opened by the Spirit to see this incredible power and love of God. Everything around us is miraculous, so how could we ever question why God is so ‘quiet’ in modern times or not performing said ‘signs and wonders’? Every day the heavens declare His glory [Psalm 19:1], He calls the starry host by name [Isaiah 40:26], He makes my heart clean for His mercies are new each morning [Lamentations 3:22-23]. I thought of how real my faith was when Jesus spoke that those who believed in Him would perform signs as great as He [John 14:12]. Yet where do I and many Christians stand in this? But then I see that the true miracle is that of the Love which Christ has given me, and because He loved me first, I can perform the most incredible miracle of love by loving others the way He loved me. I can show it in the way I live.

This doesn’t mean I can’t heal people as well, and maybe it is due to a lack of real desperation and desire, but I pray that if it’s God’s will, I would discover that kind of faith as well and not be told any different by the world around me. I love how in the book, the boy Caleb performs miraculous wonders and signs, but it’s linked to his faith which can be affected by the world around him, despite his innocence. It really just shows that it is all by the grace of God and not by our own strength, desire, or effort [Romans 9:16]. So many seem to get caught in the idea it can be achieved, or even that it needs to be achieved, but God offers it to us freely.

As I finished the book and was reading a note by Bill Bright, the second _Mamma Mia_ movie was playing in the background and captured a beautiful Christian notion despite not being a Christian film. It’s at the end where there is a great celebration, but all the fancy and important guests can’t make it. So, instead, all the locals are invited and arrive dancing and celebrating the party they have been invited to for free. Like that of the wedding banquet parable [Matthew 22:1-14] where we are invited to the great celebration of Christ for free, all we have to do is go.

The book captures a beautiful notion that it isn’t those who are sick or deformed who truly need healing. It isn’t the diseased who are dying that need a miracle; it’s those whose hearts have not known the love of Christ and been made clean by His righteousness. God’s heart breaks for them with deep sorrow and compassion. I recently lost a friend in a car accident, and although I had always felt invincible to death at my age, it hit me how real and at hand it truly was. Death truly could be around the corner; in fact, it was, but that is what gifted me the incredible realization by the grace of God that Luke was truly more alive than most, and so am I. He had experienced the incredible love of Christ and now spends eternity with His Father. Thanks to our Father and Jesus, we see that the miracle of a changed heart (and by changed, I mean the recognition of Jesus as Lord and the experience of His love [Romans 10:9-13]) is, in fact, resurrection. Therefore, who can say that people being brought back from the dead is a thing of the past when it happens more today than ever before when a person who is alive but dead spiritually, a slave to sin, discovers Christ.

“Someday you will read or hear that … is dead. Don’t you believe a word of it. I shall be more alive than I am now. I will just have changed my address. I will have gone into the presence of God.”

The last incredible thing that captured my heart was that of seeing the Kingdom of God through the eyes of a child. Both Caleb’s carers struggle to see the kingdom of God, and Caleb asks, “Why do we make it so complicated?” We often find ourselves complicating matters, but one can simply enter into the most mind-blowing love of Christ. To open our eyes as a child, to see as they do, gives a whole new perspective into who Christ is. Children are filled with innocence and love and joy and a deep-rooted trust in their fathers (parents), which for us should be the mere beginning of how we should be before our Heavenly Father, trusting Him completely. This revelation has made me stop trying to analyze every aspect of God and simply step into the relationship with Him.
