---
layout: post
title: " God's Sovereignty"
date: 2024-11-27
---

“The secret things belong to the Lord our God, but the things revealed belong to us and to our children forever, that we may follow all the words of this law.”
_Deuteronomy 29:29 (NIV)_

This truth is such great news for us in multiple ways. Firstly, we know that our God is in control and not all has been revealed. If everything had been made known to us already in the broken world that we live in, it wouldn’t full us with much hope. It also is great news that God is much bigger than we could even imagine, and the mystery of God is a wonderful, exciting thing. But on the flip side we see that the Lord has revealed some things to us, he hasn’t left us completely in the dark on his character and plans. And what he has revealed, it is for us and belongs to us. It is not just for his sake, but for ours. This means that all the promises he has given belong to us through Christ Jesus and we can hold onto them dearly. One of the greatest promises is _Romans 8:28-20 (NIV)_ **“And we know that in all things God works for the good of those who love him, who have been called according to his purpose. For those God foreknew he also predestined to be conformed to the image of his Son, that he might be the firstborn among many brothers and sisters. And those he predestined, he also called; those he called, he also justified; those he justified, he also glorified.”**  
This is good news, and it belongs to us, yet we often struggle with this promise and what Gods sovereignty means for us.

But why do we struggle with Gods sovereignty? There are many reasons but often there is a deeper reason as to why we question Gods sovereignty. As humans we have this innate desire for control over our own lives. Where does this come from? Most sin circles back to one or two root causes. In this instance we look at pride and lack of trust as two root causes.
The root of pride goes back to the fall of Satan and his pride in his beauty, where he wanted to be God and how with the fall we often are filled with this same kind of pride. We want to be God over our lives and think that we would be the best option to be in control over it.  
Secondly is lack of trust in Gods character. We don’t full believe that God is who he says he is. We filter him through a human lens of a fallen humanity. We see this with Adam and Eve in the garden where Satan questions Gods character to Eve saying that God is holding out on them, he isn’t doing what’s best for them. “For God knows that when you eat from it your eyes will be opened, and you will be like God, knowing good and evil.” Genesis 5:3 (NIV).  
But God knowing our hearts calls us in John with this work: ‘Jesus answered them, “This is the work of God, that you believe in him whom he has sent.”’ John 6:29 (ESV). If you’re coaching a sports team and you say to a player I believe in you, you’re not saying I believe you exist, that is quite clearly implied. Rather you are saying you believe in their character, who they are and what they are capable of. So when Jesus calls us with this work, believing in the existence of Jesus is quite clearly implied, it’s that God call us to believe in Jesus character and goodness, that he is capable of being our salvation. And it is a work, a daily exercise to keep believing, not just a once off decision and then becomes easy after that. Please note it’s not our work that earns our salvation but that is found only in Jesus Christ.  
So either we want control and don’t trust Gods sovereignty because of our pride and view that being God over our own life is best for us or we don’t trust in Gods character and goodness. However, it’s also important to realise that control over our own lives is just an illusion. Satan likes to make us believe that we can be in control over our own lives but the truth is that either we are submitting to Christ or we are submitting to sin. Romans 6:16 (ESV) puts it this way: “Do you not know that if you present yourselves to anyone as obedient slaves, you are slaves of the one whom you obey, either of sin, which leads to death, or of obedience, which leads to righteousness?”. The truth is that the alternative is we are slaves to sin.  
But wrestling with God in this is not all bad and can bring about blessing in our lives. What’s important is our heart behind it and who we take it to. In Gensis we see Jacob wrestle with God in a physical tussle but God blessed him through it (Gensis 32:22-32). Job faces incredible hardship an suffering, yet he takes his questions and his pain to God. When we take these things to God as the Psalmists so often did, it truly gives roots to our faith. God wants us to take these questions and doubts to him rather than allowing them to stir, unchecked in our hearts. These roots then become a rock to stand on when other challenges and tribulations come our way later in life.

Where does this all lead and what does it all mean for us?

When looking at free will vs predestination in Gods sovereignty, it’s not about understanding so much how they work or coexist but rather understanding why we can be at peace and not fully know.  
Firstly, it’s important to note that either God’s word is all true or none of it is true. The word of God doesn’t contain half-truths or only get some things right but every part of it is God inspired and true . God’s word tells us that both free will and predestination exist, it isn’t one or the other.  
We firstly see proof of the existence of free will in the existence of sin. God is holy and pure and cannot be tempted by sin (James 1:13). So, if we sin as humans, it’s a result of us having the choice and free will to do so. Some other verses that speak into this free will are Galatians 5:13 (NIV) “You, my brothers and sisters, were called to be free. But do not use your freedom to indulge the flesh; rather, serve one another humbly in love.” As well as Joshua 24:15 (NIV) “But if serving the Lord seems undesirable to you, then choose for yourselves this day whom you will serve, whether the gods your ancestors served beyond the Euphrates, or the gods of the Amorites, in whose land you are living. But as for me and my household, we will serve the Lord.””.
God’s word then has this to say about predestination. “For he says to Moses, “I will have mercy on whom I have mercy, and I will have compassion on whom I have compassion.”” Romans 9:15 (NIV) and “4 For he chose us in him before the creation of the world to be holy and blameless in his sight. In love 5 he predestined us for adoption to sonship through Jesus Christ, in accordance with his pleasure and will— 6 to the praise of his glorious grace, which he has freely given us in the One he loves.” Ephesians 1:4-6 (NIV). There are other examples of this such as 1 Peter 1:2 or even back to great promise of Romans 8:28 that we spoke about.  
So according the God’s word, it speaks of both predestination and free will existing and often arguments can be made that either one can exist but these arguments seem to point to the other idea not existing. For example someone might be able to make a case for free will, but it seems to break down the idea of predestination.  
A train analogy can be used to help us to start understanding this. If you are on a train you can only look out one window at a time to see the moving landscapes. If one window represents free will and the other predestination we can only look out one window at a time to see and understand the moving landscapes. When we’re looking out the window of freewill, we can’t see the full picture of predestination on the other side and vice versa. But God driving the train has a full frontview curved window and can see the whole picture ahead of him. Not only this but God also created the train, the two views and you on the train so to God these ideas are not far apart or separate in the way they are to us.

If we look at the parable in Matthew 13:24-30, 36-40. The premise is that a man sowed good seed in his field but while his men (notice not the man himself) were sleeping the enemy came and planted weeds. And the farmer says to wait until the harvest before pulling up the weeds so that no wheat is pulled up with it. Jesus then explained the parable that the Son of Man is the Sower who sowed the good seed which is the sons of the kingdom and the enemy is devil and the weeds are the sons of the devil. What’s interesting is that the “weeds” in this passage is plural of Gk. zizanion, which only appears here in the new testament. It is a weedy rye grass with poisonous black seeds which resemble wheat in its early growth but easily distinguishable at full maturity. So in this parable we see that children of God are sowed by God and those who are not, are children of the devil. And before maturity, while we are still on this earth they both resemble wheat and appear to be the same but we see at maturity (judgement day) that they are quite easily distinguishable. We sometimes ask the question of why does God save some ‘wheat’ but not other ‘wheat’ but actually God saves all his wheat and that which we thought was wheat wasn’t. It was in fact poisonous weeds. 1 John 4:5-6 helps back this up in speaking of those who are of the world and those who are of God and that even now we can start to see the differences between the two.

Parables are one of the best ways to teach or understand something. Why do I say this, well because it was Jesus’ preferred method of teaching. So maybe one or two of these analogies may help in understanding how free will and predestination coexist but note that these are human analogy’s used to describe God ideas so they definitely break down at some point but they still help us with understanding nonetheless.  
The first analogy is you are born the biological son or daughter of your parents. You had no control over that and no matter what you feel, you can’t change this. You are born their child. That is predestination. However, you have the choice to identify as their son and daughter and to see them as your parents and you can choose to be loved by and respect them. That is free will. God is the most incredible father who is loving, kind, patient and so much more that all those who are born as his children recognise their Father and choose at some point in their lives to recognise their Father and identify as a son and daughter of the king of kings.  
Another analogy is if you’re standing on top of a high building you have the free will to jump off. Nothing is stopping you, except the way in which you were designed with common sense, a possible fear of falling and the ability to recognise what jumping will do. Your design wasn’t in your control, you didn’t decide to just have logic. This is the predestination aspect.

But this then often leads to question of why would God allowing suffering then if he is sovereign and completely in control?  
The first important thing to note is that suffering is on account of our free will. In the garden of Eden we introduced suffering when we wanted to be in control and we introduced sin. If God hadn’t given free will to us and was just sovereign that would mean that God both causes and is fully in control over good and evil in our world but God is only good and separate from evil, he is not the root of it. It is important to note that evil isn’t beyond Gods goodness, it isn’t out of his control but he doesn’t cause it.  
That may lead us to then ask if God is all powerful, why couldn’t he create free will with no suffering? Firstly, just because we can’t think of a good reason for something doesn’t mean that one doesn’t exist. It would be arrogant of us to assume otherwise and it effectively is us saying if I can’t reason why, well that means God can’t.
Not only this but we can also look at many case studies of people who have experienced some of the worst suffering yet through it all they still praise God for his goodness. Great examples of these are Job and Paul who experienced some of the worst suffering yet testify to God’s goodness through it all.  
Another analogy is if you take an artist that paints a beautiful work. The artist can decide what he wants to do with the painting whether that means painting over it, displaying it for everyone to see or hiding it in a closet. It is their creation and they can do what they want with it. Whether they do any of these things with their art doesn’t make them a good person or not.  
And one of the most important things when it comes to suffering is to know that Jesus suffered just as we did if not worse by becoming man and subject to death on a cross for our sins. God can relate to what we are going through and has deep compassion for us as he too has experienced it.

Does this mean therefore that if God is sovereign we can just keep on sinning. We take Pauls stance in this that which he takes in Romans 6. “By no means!” Romans 6:2a (ESV) . In Romans chapter 6-7 Paul explores the idea that we are saved by faith and grace alone, not by our works but this does not mean that we continue on sinning. And this build-up leads us to Romans 8:28 which is our promise we spoke of earlier. Our sinful human selves are given these incredible promises and encouragements by God and yet so often we look to our gain in it, how much can I get away with, or we look to break down the promise because we don’t fully trust Gods character. This is what Paul had to say on the matter. “1 What shall we say then? Are we to continue in sin that grace may abound? 2 By no means! How can we who died to sin still live in it? 3 Do you not know that all of us who have been baptized into Christ Jesus were baptized into his death? 4 We were buried therefore with him by baptism into death, in order that, just as Christ was raised from the dead by the glory of the Father, we too might walk in newness of life… 14 For sin will have no dominion over you, since you are not under law but under grace.” Romans 6:1-4, 14 (ESV).

From all this we come back to the verse in Deuteronomy 29:29. This verse tells us that some things belong to the Lord and it’s not our work to fully understand these things, partly because they are too wonderful and complex for us to even comprehend. ““For my thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your ways my ways,” declares the Lord. 9 “As the heavens are higher than the earth, so are my ways higher than your ways and my thoughts than your thoughts.” Isaiah 55:8-9 (NIV).  
There are things that God has revealed and such as the great promise of Romans 8:28. We are sinful people who cannot by our own effort earn salvation and in our strength, we fall so far short of the glory of God, yet God still chose to love us and sent Jesus so that he might glorify his children and bring glory to himself in that. When we realize how much we are not in control over our own lives but tied to that our brokenness and flawed nature, it helps us to realise the blessing that the most loving, good Father is in control. To take into account that our father take great care in our creation “For you created my inmost being; you knit me together in my mother’s womb.” Psalm 139:13 (NIV). As well as his thoughts for us “How precious to me are your thoughts, God! How vast is the sum of them! 18 Were I to count them, they would outnumber the grains of sand - when I awake, I am still with you.” Psalm 139:13 (NIV).

That is great news!

So we don’t need to fully understand free will and predestination or how God’s sovereignty works, but rather focus on getting to know Gods character, who he is.
“9 For we know in part and we prophesy in part, 10 but when the perfect comes, the partial will pass away. 11 When I was a child, I spoke like a child, I thought like a child, I reasoned like a child. When I became a man, I gave up childish ways. 12 For now we see in a mirror dimly, but then face to face. Now I know in part; then I shall know fully, even as I have been fully known.” 1 Corinthians 13:9-12 (ESV).  
This essay isn’t there to explain how it works and give some incredible revelation to explain it but rather aims to help us understand that we don’t need to know fully now, yet we can be at peace in it and take away the good news from it. As 1 Corinthians 13:9-12 says that one day we will fully know. But we can take comfort in that even though we don’t fully know now, we are fully known. God doesn’t choose his children and then have patience for them despite their sin, but rather he knew all their sin and still chose them and loved them.

The good news goes further. Our salvation is not dependent on us and making sure that every detail of our theology is perfect. Yes, there is the very key belief of Jesus and what he did, but our salvation does not depend on ability to grasp Gods sovereignty, which is a concept so much higher than us anyway. Our salvation is dependent on Jesus and what he did for us. He is the one who justifies us.  
Our father has loved us and by his grace alone we are saved. The work we are given is to believe in his character, to trust in Him. The more we get to know who God is, the more we see the beauty in a promise like Romans 8:28 and the truer freedom we experience.
